title: The Killer Is In The House
description: ...and he has nowhere to run.
tags:
- redacted
created_at: 2024-08-04T02:48:25.233Z

# The Killer Is In The House

Who will save us?

From what? You begin to ask, and yet the answers expand obviously, painfully. To list them would disservice only what I neglect to mention. Something deep, terrible, even ineffable, is very wrong here. This way of things, throughout America and its colonies and pseudo-colonies, and indeed the world entire that its hegemony has influenced, depends on cruelty to a degree that seems unfathomable to anyone who dares to rise above an inoculation that amounts to a spiritual lobotomy. You know the type.

You think seriously about it. Aliens might save us, or kill us, which might not be that different. Some new technology might change, well, something, again. But only faintly, briefly, does the thought *we could save us* cross your mind, and you dismiss it in search of some easier hope, something you find more *feasible*... but, perhaps like me, you return to it, humiliated and desperate. In your exhausted hands it hardens into something more bitter. More determined. *Only we can save us.*

...

The enemy we face is not a nation-state, not specifically. On the one hand, my objectives preclude the existence of the United States of America, but its people deserve all compassion and accommodation, as all living do. And yet it is not only America as a system of institutions which afflicts us, but also spirits of hate, corruption, and devouring ignorance, which earn the name foe. This is not a coalition that lives in houses or ages and dies. They do not have names or addresses, and yet they must be killed more than any living villain. They prevail not only over institutions, but make nests in our psyches, implanted by image and idea into newborns through sheer saturation. The cop in your head. Where Fanon writes of the stark and physical distinctions between colonizer and colonized, in the imperial core these distinctions fracture over a litany of perspective-facets, and the imperial murk festoons within their contours. However, unlike in Fanon's Algeria, here in the imperial core, the colonizer has nowhere to run.

The killer is in the house. The phone is disconnected; lights flicker. Floorboards creak from age or -- your heart seizes -- from his footsteps. No neighbors for miles, not in a way that matters. No one is coming. No one is coming. No one is coming but *him*.

This is why you keep a baseball bat. Squeezing its grip, raising its heft, a strength flows from it, back up your arms. The killer has not trapped you, it whispers. He has entered yours.

...

What would it mean, to be saved?

It seems so excruciatingly Christian to even say it that way, when their theocratic barbarism has sought for more than a thousand years to extinguish my people. Luckily, there is not a genocide that one could dream which would work on us. The Immortal Tradition, or whatever you want to call it, has been practiced by the living so long as there has been a thought to be had, a choice to be made; any change, desired. The Tradition's inspiration is embedded in the spirit of life itself. No amount of brutality will prevent us from recurring in the children of our oppressors. Nothing short of total extinction will deny us the future.

At the same time, this flesh and blood only has the one life. I want to see good in my own time, good for us all. My values bestow duties that I owe my life to, that are my life's work to fulfill, but which are also merely a way of life. Utopia isn't a technology but a pursuit of relation that transcends predation and rentseeking, and no matter what any imperial propagandist ever proclaims, it is a grounded, realistic possibility. In an age of the unprecedented, no one can meaningfully tell you what is not possible. Prior wisdom's faults will not be known until the dust has settled. There is only how we choose to live, and what we choose to live for. I choose utopia.

I can only justify my unshakeable faith with the words, I have seen it. Poverty and privation can be abolished; war and slavery, banished and forgotten. It will take thousands of years, perhaps, or it will take no more than a handful of generations; the difference depends on things I cannot know. My enemies preach that their villainy is embedded in the human spirit, just as I am, and thus that utopia is impossible because their cruelty cannot be excised. I have nothing to say but that they are wrong, and you are foolish to believe them. Human nature is to be social, to socially construct the self; the rest is a matter of circumstances which can be cultivated.

The purpose of civilization *is* to cultivate those higher circumstances, to engender a more loving peace than that of predator and prey, even of profiteer and prole. A civilization emerges from the satisfaction of the mandates of governance; a government is whatever enacts the mandates. If nothing is enacting the mandates, then you don't have a government. You live in carrion, where wolves and vultures dine. They devour your midst as much as you yourself. Buildings empty, buildings decayed; people hollowed, people lost. You cannot persuade the predator to eat less or to eat only this in a way that does not make you prey. You must create the basis that forces the predator's choice and produces a new rationale, one that could not dream of the cruelty we visit today.

The West is not a civilization. The United States is not a government. These are barbaric pageants, narratives and institutions steeped in base savagery. From the makers of the Enlightenment, the concentration camp. From the most rational empiricists, the Triangle Trade. From the Land of the Free, the Trail of Tears. Inversions, inversions, inversions! They prevent the work of governance from occurring through overwhelming physical and psychic force. Poverty, rent, debt, crime, all must exist as pretext for our way of life; slavery and rape are not bad outcomes or rare events but requisite components in systems of power and exploitation. You cannot persuade the death cult to abandon these profane rituals that are their purpose any more than you could convince their miserable pantheon to abdicate its seat in the heavens. The cult must be destroyed, its most existential spirit obliterated. Only then can its thralls begin the journey out of the belly of the beast, unimpeded.

We could have civilization. It has been achieved in many parts of the world throughout history, in any number of configurations. Our current era makes it very difficult, but it does not preclude the possibility, and it certainly doesn't change history. The question has never been how to make utopia work, but only how to protect the work our hearts call us to do. The work we do for those we love. The work we do out of love. The work that makes love possible. Industrialism and computerization present unprecedented material and organizational challenges, but I see no reason to lose faith just because my enemies claim to have won the first round. We do not have to play their games.

...

The mandates of governance cannot be listed, but must be collectively established as a trajectory. It is not only that people must today have their bread and water, but that they will tomorrow need electricity and mass transit. Nor can the subjects of these mandates be enumerated; they do not concern rights for some and not others. The right to life, even to prosperity, must be expanded to whosoever might desire it, and an appropriate economic capacity must be marshaled and maintained. It becomes absurd to consider whether a utility is publicly or privately owned; to provide the utility is the work of governance. Every eviction, every medical bill, and every switched-off tap, demonstrates how that work is perverted and prevented.

The thing I name a State often calls itself a government, but it only exists to obfuscate the work of governance. It is produced by, and exists to reproduce, the class conflict that sustains it. It produces the classes and the conflict, emitting external pressure to reify them in turn like noxious radiation. It is not the work that produces society. It does not control the means of production, just some gun to our head.

The work of governance occurs relentless, and in all its absence is sickness and need and death. It is shelters and kitchens and the social spaces that keep the suicide-urge quiet. Government produces the means of survival; whoever does the work of providing that survival, is doing the work of government. It is not one great entity, it never was and it never had to be. It occurs where it can and people die where it can't. You think, but only a coordinated State-like apparatus can seriously face complex crises like climate change. In a way, yes. Only together can great strength be marshaled, but the only being worthy to seat the whole world's throne is a fleshless spirit, a sort of consensus, a kind of ambition -- a great plurination, of all peoples. But first we have to get there, and that means dealing with that damned gun.

You glance up at the finger on the trigger. It's pale and clammy. Nervous and inexperienced. No, not inexperiend. Inept. The gun has been known to misfire -- more and more lately, it seems. The brute detects insubordination and insists with a pistol whip, "The economy's going great, though," whatever that means. The economy they dream, could never abolish evictions. No state of prosperity as they can imagine it will end the oppression that defines our struggle. The gun must be turned; fear grows in the warden's eyes as fire crackles in yours.

...

The situation of the Americas differs from that in Europe -- the other so-to-say Western domain -- through its particular connection to industrialized colonialism. What the English did to the Irish for centuries was only a primitive prelude to the automated butchery that would settle North America. The Parisians did not need to be slaughtered to settle Paris, but a federation of federations of metropolitan societies had to be literally buried, literally washed away, in order to render their ancestral lands suitable for the heirs of Christendom, who have gleefully stripped it for centuries, on the backs of people they propertized at gunpoint. This history creates the conditions of class that we experience. As Mariátegui argues, there is indeed no war but the class war, because the crisis of class is the confrontation of colonialism. As Williams declares, the spirit of fear at the heart of whiteness can be exploited, and cowed.

The practical realities that emerge from this history illuminate a strategic topography, and populate a book of tactics. There is a vast pre-settler history-of-histories that one can align with; one need not drape themselves in the imperial doublespeak of liberty and individualism, to envision a compassionate pluralist society that outlives the empire. One need not align with the ignorance of settlers to achieve meaningful coalition, because that ignorance yearns to betray you.

(I do not yearn for the past; I know that, because even the gods of my enemies will fade, we have a future. It is not my place to design or dictate the future we share. It is my place to evoke the conditions that will produce it.)



--------------------------------------
## DRAFT SNIPPETS

At the same time, this flesh and blood only has the one life, and I am obliged by the duties of my values to exert my body toward the realization of utopia. Whether you believe me or not, utopia is a realizable goal. Poverty and privation can be abolished; war and slavery, banished and forgotten. It will take thousands of years, perhaps, or it will take no more than a handful of generations; the difference depends on things I cannot know. My enemies preach that their villainy is embedded in the human spirit, just as I am, and thus that utopia is impossible because their cruelty cannot be excised. I have nothing to say but that they are wrong, and you are foolish to believe them. Human nature is to be social, to socially construct the self; the rest is a matter of circumstances which can be cultivated.

The purpose of civilization is to cultivate those higher circumstances, to engender a more loving pax than that of predator and prey, even of profiteer and prole. A civilization emerges from the satisfaction of the mandates of governance; a government is whatever enacts the mandates. If nothing is enacting the mandates, then you don't have a government. You live in carrion, where wolves and vultures dine. They devour your midst as much as you yourself. Buildings empty, buildings decayed; people hollowed, people lost. You cannot persuade the predator to eat less or to eat only this in a way that does not make you prey. You must create the basis that forces the predator's choice and produces a new rationale, one that could not dream of the cruelty we visit today.

The West is not a civilization. The United States is not a government. These are barbaric pageants, narratives and institutions steeped in base savagery. From the makers of the Enlightenment, the concentration camp. From the most rational empiricists, the Triangle Trade. From the Land of the Free, the Trail of Tears. Inversions, inversions, inversions! They prevent the work of governance from occurring through overwhelming physical and psychic force. Poverty, rent, debt, crime, all must exist as pretext for our way of life; slavery and rape are not bad outcomes or rare events but requisite components in systems of power and exploitation. You cannot persuade the death cult to abandon these profane rituals that are their purpose any more than you could convince their miserable pantheon to abandon its seat in the heavens. The cult must be destroyed, its most existential spirit obliterated. Only then can its thralls begin the journey out of the belly of the beast, unimpeded.

We could have civilization. It has been achieved in many parts of the world throughout history, in any number of configurations. Our current era makes it very difficult, but it does not preclude the possibility, and it certainly doesn't change history. The question has never been how to make utopia work, but only how to protect the work our hearts call us to do. The work we do for those we love. The work we do out of love. The work that makes love possible. Industrialism and computerization present unprecedented material and organizational challenges, but I see no reason to lose faith because my enemies claim to have won the first round. We do not have to play their games.

The mandates of governance cannot be listed, but must be collectively established as a trajectory. It is not only that people must today have their bread and water, but that they will tomorrow need electricity and mass transit. Nor can the subjects of these mandates be enumerated; they do not concern rights for some and not others. The right to life, even to prosperity, must be expanded to whosoever might desire it, and an appropriate economic capacity must be marshaled and maintained. It becomes absurd to consider whether a utility is publicly or privately owned; to provide the utility is the work of governance. Every switched-off tap for want of payment demonstrates how that work is perverted and prevented.

The work of governance does not necessitate a singular government. In *The State and Revolution*, Lenin quotes Engels thus:

> The state, then, has not existed from all eternity. There have been societies that did without it, that had no idea of the state and state power. At a certain stage of economic development, which was necessarily bound up with the split of society into classes, the state became a necessity owing to this split. We are now rapidly approaching a stage in the development of production at which the existence of these classes not only will have ceased to be a necessity, but will become a positive hindrance to production. They will fall as they arose at an earlier stage. Along with them the state will inevitably fall. Society, which will reorganize production on the basis of a free and equal association of the producers, will put the whole machinery of state where it will then belong: into a museum of antiquities, by the side of the spinning-wheel and the bronze axe.

Thus we can see how a state like the United States differs from an organ of governance. It is the organization that emerges from, and become responsible for maintaining, conflicts between invented classes. That conflict undermines the work of governance as any war does. When that conflict ends, as it will end, then we will have no need for such organizations any more than a fish needs a snorkel. The idea of it would approach the unthinkable. Thus, it becomes nonsensical to propose a new state, or to seize state power and embody it. These are all debates about how to use the master's tools. I do not care about the presidency. I care about logistics, and the United States merely guards that power for others. Even if my faction were to win landslide elections, would Amazon or Walmart permit us to abolish prices? There are real gains to be had in navigating so-called democratic processes, but you will never escape the need for that needless begging-for-our-lives without transformation, without revolution. Smash your despair and swallow your grief. Your values call upon you.

Beyond struggle, utopia awaits.

...

(I do not know how to relate to a type of exhaustion anymore. The type that says, I would be content if I only had my particular concession. And, the type that loses hope knowing death will come before victory. Values illuminate ways of relating, ways of being, that can be lived under any circumstances, no matter how far into the future their ambitions travel, no matter how asymptotic their ends. The fascists can take my roses and break my body, but no power that exists can stop me from practicing my way of life.)

...